Add the documentation for OPA policy for synapse gateway (#5482)
wso2/docs-apim: en/docs/design/api-security/opa-validation/overview.md

# Validate Request with Open Policy Agent (OPA)

The [Open Policy Agent (OPA)](https://openpolicyagent.org/) is an open source, general-purpose policy engine that unifies policy enforcement. 
With the ability to define complex policies as a code, OPA provides the much needed flexibility over standard static access control mechanisms such as role based or attribute based access control.

> From WSO2 APIM 4.1.0 onwards, you can offload some responsibility of making the decision to authorize or not when a consumer invokes APIs based on policies attached to APIs. Both WSO2 API Manager regular gateway and Choreo Connect supports Open Policy Agent based request validation. Open Policy Agent comprises of a policy engine that allows users (or systems) to query policies for decisions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can offload some responsibility of making the decision to authorize or not when a consumer invokes APIs based on policies attached to APIs. Both WSO2 API Manager regular Gateway and Choreo Connect supports Open Policy Agent based request validation. Open Policy Agent comprises of a policy engine that allows users (or systems) to query policies for decisions. 
```

A policy for Open Policy Agent can be though as a set of rules and policy engine evaluate these rules based on the input it receives.

> WSO2 API Manager uses this unique policy engine to evaluate the requests that gateway receives and decide the fate of the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WSO2 API Manager uses this unique policy engine to evaluate the requests that the Gateway receives and decides the fate of the request.
```

<a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/design/security/opa/opa-policy-architecture.png">
    <img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/design/security/opa/opa-policy-architecture.png" alt="OPA Architecture"/>
</a>

## How to use OPA for request validation?

> In oder to evaluate requests with OPA, first you need to deploy OPA as a host-level daemon or a sidecar container. Once a gateway receives a request,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In oder to evaluate requests with OPA, first you need to deploy OPA as a host-level daemon or a sidecar container. Once a Gateway receives a request,
```

> gateway will extract a predefined set of meta-data from the request and query OPA via HTTP/HTTPS. OPA Policy engine will evaluate the request meta-data against the configured policy and return it's validation response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it extracts a predefined set of meta-data from the request and query OPA via HTTP/HTTPS. The OPA Policy engine evaluates the request meta-data against the configured policy and returns its validation response.
```

> Based on the response, gateway will allow or block the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Gateway allows or blocks the request based on the response.
```

!!! note

>     Gateway node should be able to communicate with this OPA server. It can be either HTTP or HTTPS and if HTTPS is used, make sure that you upload the certificates of the OPA server to the client trust store of the gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The Gateway node should be able to communicate with this OPA server. It can be either HTTP or HTTPS, and if HTTPS is used, make sure that you upload the certificates of the OPA server to the client trust store of the Gateway.
```

>     The Gateway node should be able to communicate with this OPA server. It can be either HTTP or HTTPS, and if HTTPS is used, make sure that you upload the certificates of the OPA server to the client trust store of the Gateway.

Reviewer: Do we need instructions on how to do this?

Author: Will add the command to upload the certificate.

Author: fixed via a3abc41d8cf31aafe25e6ee98583a01138364814

### Attaching OPA Policy

> Once OPA engine is deployed, you have to attach the policy to the operations that to the operations that you want to enforce OPA validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once OPA engine is deployed, you have to attach the policy to the operations that you want to enforce OPA validation.
```

> 1. In the publisher portal, select the API that you want to configure the OPA policy and navigate to **Develop -> API Configurations -> Policies**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the Publisher Portal, select the API that you want to configure the OPA policy and navigate to **Develop -> API Configurations -> Policies**.
```

> 2. Select the gateway that the API required to be deployed in the upper right corner of the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select the Gateway that the API is required to be deployed in the upper right corner of the page.
```

3. For this functionality, there is a policy that you can invoke for the request flow named **Validate Request with OPA Policy**. Drag and drop this policy to the request flow of your required operations. 
4. If you want to apply this to all the operations, select the **Apply to all resources** option from the left bar.
5. Fill the configurations as per your deployment and save the page.

> 6. Create a new revision from these changes and deploy it to the gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Create a new revision from these changes and deploy it to the Gateway.
```

> 6. Create a new revision from these changes and deploy it to the Gateway.

Reviewer: Shall we link to steps on how to do this?

Author: Creating a new revision is a basic flow of the APIM. I think the user who refer this docs is already aware about revision and deploy steps.

A policy for Open Policy Agent can be though as a set of rules and policy engine evaluate these rules based on the input it receives.

WSO2 API Manager uses this unique policy engine to evaluate the requests that the Gateway receives and decides the fate of the request.

<a href="{{base_path}}/assets/img/design/security/opa/opa-policy-architecture.png">
    <img src="{{base_path}}/assets/img/design/security/opa/opa-policy-architecture.png" alt="OPA Architecture"/>
</a>

## How to use OPA for request validation?

In oder to evaluate requests with OPA, first you need to deploy OPA as a host-level daemon or a sidecar container. Once a Gateway receives a request,
it extracts a predefined set of meta-data from the request and query OPA via HTTP/HTTPS. The OPA Policy engine evaluates the request meta-data against the configured policy and returns its validation response.
The Gateway allows or blocks the request based on the response.

!!! note
    The Gateway node should be able to communicate with this OPA server. It can be either HTTP or HTTPS, and if HTTPS is used, make sure that you upload the certificates of the OPA server to the client trust store of the Gateway.

>     You can add a certificate to trust store via following command.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You can add a certificate to the trust store via the following command.  
```

### Request Payload to the OPA server

> By default, each gateway uses a default Request Generator to generate the request payload to the OPA server. You can configure your policies in OPA server based on the following request format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, each Gateway uses a default Request Generator to generate the request payload to the OPA server. You can configure your policies in OPA server based on the following request format.
```

!!! Info

>     You can have your own **Request Generator Implementation**, you can do so by implementing the interface **OPARequestGenerator**. [Custom OPA Policy with Custom Request Generator](#custom-opa-policy-with-custom-request-generator) in this document describes it in more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You can have your own **Request Generator Implementation** - you can do so by implementing the interface **OPARequestGenerator**. [Custom OPA Policy with Custom Request Generator](#custom-opa-policy-with-custom-request-generator) in this document describes it in more detail.
```

}
```

### Customize the OPA request payload and response validation

> If you need to customize the OPA input json or OPA response validation, you can do so by writing your own custom OPA policies with custom Request Generators. Both regular gateway and Choreo Connect supports this extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to customize the OPA input JSON or OPA response validation, you can do so by writing your own custom OPA policies with custom Request Generators. Both regular Gateway and Choreo Connect support this extension.
```
